https://www.analyticsinsight.net/why-artificial-intelligence-can-never-code-like-pro/

Analytics Insight

Why Artificial Intelligence Can Never Code Like Pro






Check why artificial intelligence can never code like a pro
Since large language models can simulate software, the first thought that pops up is, ” Will AI replace programmers? “The response is negative. In actual fact, Artificial Intelligence will expand the job description of software engineers’ autonomous systems programming.
Working in the software development industry for more than forty years has enabled me to observe the rise of such dramatic forecasts. Many people think that technology will surpass the human capacity of programming entirely. These predictions have been consistently wrong for two reasons: They have vague concepts where programmers are just those quirky guys you see in movies all the time. The pressure of the massive software industry demand doesn’t allow them to enjoy it.
Programming is an entire language of its own, linguistic and semantic. At the heart of software creation lies ingenuity, defining challenges, disintegrating them into separate parts, finding bugs, and accuracy in communicating. These are the types of things that are incredibly human and involve skill, and AI has yet to get there. An overarching skill that is less apparent than programming skills and coding capabilities and is a more significant asset than the ability to program is creativity and original thinking.
AI can take care of part of this work, but obviously, it still has some flaws. Using it could reduce the cost of software creation. This is already happening. No sooner, my task is now done with the help of LLM, as I used to solve it with a team of engineers for almost five months in the past.
Does this mean programmers will be needed less? Because AI is very productive, it will help us decrease the number of programmers. Yes, the decrease can be overcome by oppositely dropping the cost of software, just as the request will be augmented. It’s important to note that many countries around the world have a software deficit, which is a huge problem.
Think of a scenario: Imagine that you’re working in any of your previous jobs. This time, your team of engineers is hard at work building software tailored to your needs. The options could go really wild, from drinking coffee to programming the machine that will fetch coffee for you. The only reason you can’t own this team is the prohibitive cost, not materials that you can help find or make.
Given AI’s continued development, it can soon outperform programmers at everything they currently do. On the other hand, the idea gets even more complex when we consider that programming inevitably comes down to the process of thinking, so the very AI project that is able to complete such tasks would, in fact, be on the path to replacing all human labor.
You May Also Like

Top 10 Most Popular Cryptocurrencies with High Returns in 2023


Top 10 Data Science Crash Courses Beginners Should Take Up


Don’t Miss Out On These 3 Early Stage Crypto Presales: Doge Uprising, Pandoshi & Algotech


What Role Do NFTs and Metaverse Play in IoT?

Bitcoin Halving Could Push Bitcoin Price to $100K in 2024. What Does That Mean for Solana and New Crypto Raboo?
Raboo ICO Nears $1 Million Mark As Theta Network and Injective Shed 20% in Volatile Market
Altcoins Traders Will Be Glad They Bought These Tokens in Q2
The 5 Best Crypto Coins To Buy Before the Ethereum ETF Is Approved
Picked Stories
Bitcoin Halving Could Push Bitcoin Price to $100K in 2024. What Does That Mean for Solana and New Crypto Raboo?
Raboo ICO Nears $1 Million Mark As Theta Network and Injective Shed 20% in Volatile Market
Altcoins Traders Will Be Glad They Bought These Tokens in Q2
The 5 Best Crypto Coins To Buy Before the Ethereum ETF Is Approved
About Us
Analytics Insight® is an influential platform dedicated to insights, trends, and opinion from the world of data-driven technologies. It monitors developments, recognition, and achievements made by Artificial Intelligence, Big Data and Analytics companies across the globe.
Links
About AI
Reach Us
Special Editions
Latest Issue
Disclaimer: Any financial and crypto market information given on Analytics Insight is written for informational purpose only and is not an investment advice. Conduct your own research by contacting financial experts before making any investment decisions, more information here.